Overview

A migraine can cause severe throbbing pain or a pulsing sensation, usually on one side of the head. It's often accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and extreme sensitivity to light and sound. Migraine attacks can last for hours to days, and the pain can be so severe that it interferes with your daily activities.

includes Constipation Mood changes, from depression to euphoria,Food cravings,Neck stiffness,Increased thirst and urination,Frequent yawning it may be a symptom of alzheimer you can check it through MRI scan. known as an aura occurs before or with the headache. An aura can include visual disturbances, such as flashes of light or blind spots, or other disturbances, such as tingling on one side of the face or in an arm or leg and difficulty speaking.

Medications can help prevent some migraines and make them less painful. The right medicines, combined with self-help remedies and lifestyle changes, might help.

Symptoms

One or two days before a migraine, you might notice subtle changes that warn of an upcoming migraine, including Constipation Mood changes, from depression to euphoria,Food cravings,Neck stiffness,Increased thirst and urination.Frequent yawning

Causes

Though migraine causes aren't fully understood, genetics and environmental factors appear to play a role.

Changes in the brainstem and its interactions with the trigeminal nerve, a major pain pathway, might be involved. So might imbalances in brain chemicals — including serotonin, which helps regulate pain in your nervous system.

Researchers are studying the role of serotonin in migraines. Other neurotransmitters play a role in the pain of migraine, including calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP).

Migraine triggers

There are a number of migraine triggers, including:

Hormonal changes in women. Fluctuations in estrogen, such as before or during menstrual periods, pregnancy and menopause, seem to trigger headaches in many women. Hormonal medications, such as oral contraceptives and hormone replacement therapy, also can worsen migraines. Some women, however, find their migraines occurring less often when taking these medications.

Drinks. These include alcohol, especially wine, and too much caffeine, such as coffee.

These include alcohol, especially wine, and too much caffeine, such as coffee. Stress. Stress at work or home can cause migraines.

Stress at work or home can cause migraines. Sensory stimuli. Bright lights and sun glare can induce migraines, as can loud sounds. Strong smells — including perfume, paint thinner, secondhand smoke and others — trigger migraines in some people.

Bright lights and sun glare can induce migraines, as can loud sounds. Strong smells — including perfume, paint thinner, secondhand smoke and others — trigger migraines in some people. Sleep changes. Missing sleep, getting too much sleep or jet lag can trigger migraines in some people.

Missing sleep, getting too much sleep or jet lag can trigger migraines in some people. Physical factors. Intense physical exertion, including sexual activity, might provoke migraines.

Intense physical exertion, including sexual activity, might provoke migraines. Weather changes. A change of weather or barometric pressure can prompt a migraine.

A change of weather or barometric pressure can prompt a migraine. Medications. Oral contraceptives and vasodilators, such as nitroglycerin, can aggravate migraines.

Oral contraceptives and vasodilators, such as nitroglycerin, can aggravate migraines. Foods. Aged cheeses and salty and processed foods might trigger migraines. So might skipping meals or fasting.

Aged cheeses and salty and processed foods might trigger migraines. So might skipping meals or fasting. Food additives. These include the sweetener aspartame and the preservative monosodium glutamate (MSG), found in many foods.

Risk factors

Several factors make you more prone to having migraines, including Family history,If you have a family member with migraines, then you have a good chance of developing them too Women are three times more likely to have migraines. Hormonal changes. For women who have migraines, headaches might begin just before or shortly after onset of menstruation. They might also change during pregnancy or menopause. Migraines generally improve after menopause.

Complications

Taking combination painkillers, such as Excedrin Migraine for more than 10 days a month for three months or in higher doses can trigger serious medication-overuse headaches. The same is true if you take aspirin or ibuprofen (Advil, Motrin IB, others) for more than 15 days a month or triptans, sumatriptan (Imitrex, Tosymra) or rizatriptan (Maxalt), for more than nine days a month.

Medication-overuse headaches occur when medications stop relieving pain and begin to cause headaches. You then use more pain medication, which continues the cycle.