Overview

Depression is a mood disorder that causes a persistent feeling of sadness and loss of interest. Also called major depressive disorder or clinical depression, it affects how you feel, think and behave and can lead to a variety of emotional and physical problems. You may have trouble doing normal day-to-day activities, and sometimes you may feel as if life isn't worth living.

More than just a bout of the blues, depression isn't a weakness and you can't simply "snap out" of it. Depression may require long-term treatment. But don't get discouraged. Most people with depression feel better with medication, psychotherapy or both.

Depression care at Mayo Clinic

Symptoms

Feelings of sadness, tearfulness, emptiness or hopelessness,Angry outbursts, irritability or frustration, even over small matters,Loss of interest or pleasure in most or all normal activities, such as hobbies or sports,Sleep disturbances, including insomnia or sleeping too much it may also be a symptom of alzheimer you can predict it by uploading a MRI scan image.

Causes

It's not known exactly what causes depression. As with many mental disorders, a variety of factors may be involved, such as:

Biological differences. People with depression appear to have physical changes in their brains. The significance of these changes is still uncertain, but may eventually help pinpoint causes.

People with depression appear to have physical changes in their brains. The significance of these changes is still uncertain, but may eventually help pinpoint causes. Brain chemistry. Neurotransmitters are naturally occurring brain chemicals that likely play a role in depression. Recent research indicates that changes in the function and effect of these neurotransmitters and how they interact with neurocircuits involved in maintaining mood stability may play a significant role in depression and its treatment.

Neurotransmitters are naturally occurring brain chemicals that likely play a role in depression. Recent research indicates that changes in the function and effect of these neurotransmitters and how they interact with neurocircuits involved in maintaining mood stability may play a significant role in depression and its treatment. Hormones. Changes in the body's balance of hormones may be involved in causing or triggering depression. Hormone changes can result with pregnancy and during the weeks or months after delivery (postpartum) and from thyroid problems, menopause or a number of other conditions.

Changes in the body's balance of hormones may be involved in causing or triggering depression. Hormone changes can result with pregnancy and during the weeks or months after delivery (postpartum) and from thyroid problems, menopause or a number of other conditions. Inherited traits. Depression is more common in people whose blood relatives also have this condition. Researchers are trying to find genes that may be involved in causing depression.

Risk factors

Depression often begins in the teens, 20s or 30s, but it can happen at any age More women than men are diagnosed with depression, but this may be due in part because women are more likely to seek treatment,Factors that seem to increase the risk of developing or triggering depression includeCertain personality traits, such as low self-esteem and being too dependent, self-critical or pessimistic.

Complications

Depression is a serious disorder that can take a terrible toll on you and your family Depression often gets worse if it isn't treated, resulting in emotional, behavioral and health problems that affect every area of your life.

Examples of complications associated with depression include:

Excess weight or obesity, which can lead to heart disease and diabetes

Pain or physical illness

Alcohol or drug misuse

Anxiety, panic disorder or social phobia

Family conflicts, relationship difficulties, and work or school problems

Social isolation

Suicidal feelings, suicide attempts or suicide

Self-mutilation, such as cutting

Premature death from medical conditions

Prevention

There's no sure way to prevent depression. However, these strategies may help.