Overview

Liver problems Open pop-up dialog box Close Liver problems Liver problems Liver problems that can occur include fatty liver disease and cirrhosis. The liver and its cells — as seen through a microscope — change dramatically when a normal liver becomes fatty or cirrhotic.

The liver is an organ about the size of a football. It sits just under your rib cage on the right side of your abdomen. The liver is essential for digesting food and ridding your body of toxic substances.

Liver disease can be inherited (genetic). Liver problems can also be caused by a variety of factors that damage the liver, such as viruses, alcohol use and obesity.

Over time, conditions that damage the liver can lead to scarring (cirrhosis), which can lead to liver failure, a life-threatening condition. But early treatment may give the liver time to heal.

Symptoms

Signs and symptoms include

Skin and eyes that appear yellowish (jaundice)

Abdominal pain and swelling

Swelling in the legs and ankles

Itchy skin

Dark urine color

Pale stool color

Chronic fatigue

Nausea or vomiting

Loss of appetite

Tendency to bruise easily

When to see a doctor

Make an appointment with your doctor if you have any persistent signs or symptoms that worry you. Seek immediate medical attention if you have abdominal pain that is so severe that you can't stay still.

Causes

Liver disease has many causes.

Infection

Parasites and viruses can infect the liver, causing inflammation that reduces liver function. The viruses that cause liver damage can be spread through blood or semen, contaminated food or water, or close contact with a person who is infected. The most common types of liver infection are hepatitis viruses, including:

Hepatitis A

Hepatitis B

Hepatitis C

Immune system abnormality

Diseases in which your immune system attacks certain parts of your body (autoimmune) can affect your liver. Examples of autoimmune liver diseases include:

Autoimmune hepatitis

Primary biliary cholangitis

Primary sclerosing cholangitis

Genetics

An abnormal gene inherited from one or both of your parents can cause various substances to build up in your liver, resulting in liver damage. Genetic liver diseases include:

Hemochromatosis

Wilson's disease

Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency

Cancer and other growths

Examples include:

Liver cancer

Bile duct cancer

Liver adenoma

Other

Additional, common causes of liver disease include:

Chronic alcohol abuse

Fat accumulation in the liver (nonalcoholic fatty liver disease)

Certain prescription or over-the-counter medications

Certain herbal compounds

Risk factors

Factors that may increase your risk of liver disease include:

Heavy alcohol use

Obesity

Type 2 diabetes

Tattoos or body piercings

Injecting drugs using shared needles

Blood transfusion before 1992

Exposure to other people's blood and body fluids

Unprotected sex

Exposure to certain chemicals or toxins

Family history of liver disease

Complications

Complications of liver disease vary, depending on the cause of your liver problems. Untreated liver disease may progress to liver failure, a life-threatening condition.

Prevention

To prevent liver disease a person shold not consume alcohol,intake of proper food.