Overview

Technically, the term "swine flu" refers to influenza in pigs. Occasionally, pigs transmit influenza viruses to people, mainly to hog farmers and veterinarians. Less often, someone infected with swine flu passes the infection to others.

In the spring of 2009, scientists recognized a particular strain of flu virus known as H1N1. This virus is actually a combination of viruses from pigs, birds and humans. During the 2009-10 flu season, H1N1 caused the respiratory infection in humans that was commonly referred to as swine flu. Because so many people around the world got sick that year, the World Health Organization declared the flu caused by H1N1 to be a global pandemic.

In August 2010, the World Health Organization declared the pandemic over. Since that time, scientists have changed the way they name viruses. The H1N1 virus is now known as H1N1v. The v stands for variant and indicates that the virus normally circulates in animals but has been detected in humans. Since 2011, another strain, H3N2v, has been circulating in humans and also causes the flu. Both strains are included in the flu vaccine for 2018-19.

Symptoms

Fever (but not always),Chills,Cough,Sore throat,Runny or stuffy nose,Watery, red eyes,Body aches,Headache,Fatigue,Diarrhea,Nausea and vomiting,Flu symptoms develop about one to three days after you're exposed to the virus.


Risk factors

If you've lived in or traveled to an area where many people are affected by swine flu, you may have been exposed to the virus,Swine farmers and veterinarians have the highest risk of exposure to true swine flu because they work with and are near pigs.

Complications

Like seasonal flu, Swine Flu can lead to more serious complications, including pneumonia and respiratory failure And it can make conditions like diabetes or asthma worse If you have symptoms like shortness of breath, severe vomiting, abdominal pain, dizziness, or confusion, call your doctor right away.

Prevention

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends annual flu vaccination for everyone age 6 months or older. Flu vaccines for 2018-19 protect against the viruses that cause swine flu and one or two other viruses that are expected to be the most common during flu season.

The vaccine is available as an injection or a nasal spray. The nasal spray is approved for use in healthy people 2 through 49 years of age who are not pregnant. The nasal spray isn't recommended for some groups, such as pregnant women, children between 2 and 4 years old with asthma or wheezing, and people who have compromised immune systems.

These measures also help prevent flu and limit its spread: