Overview

Pneumonia is an infection that inflames the air sacs in one or both lungs. The air sacs may fill with fluid or pus (purulent material), causing cough with phlegm or pus, fever, chills, and difficulty breathing. A variety of organisms, including bacteria, viruses and fungi, can cause pneumonia.

Pneumonia can range in seriousness from mild to life-threatening. It is most serious for infants and young children, people older than age 65, and people with health problems or weakened immune systems.

Symptoms

Chest pain when you breathe or cough,Confusion or changes in mental awareness (in adults age 65 and older) Cough, which may produce phlegm Fatigue,Fever, sweating and shaking chills.

Risk factors

Children who are 2 years old or younger,People who are age 65 or older are highly vulnerable Other risk factors include Being hospitalized,You're at greater risk of pneumonia if you're in a hospital intensive care unit, especially if you're on a machine that helps you breathe (a ventilator).

Complications

Bacteria that enter the bloodstream from your lungs can spread the infection to other organs, potentially causing organ failure.

Bacteria that enter the bloodstream from your lungs can spread the infection to other organs, potentially causing organ failure. Difficulty breathing. If your pneumonia is severe or you have chronic underlying lung diseases, you may have trouble breathing in enough oxygen. You may need to be hospitalized and use a breathing machine (ventilator) while your lung heals.

If your pneumonia is severe or you have chronic underlying lung diseases, you may have trouble breathing in enough oxygen. You may need to be hospitalized and use a breathing machine (ventilator) while your lung heals. Fluid accumulation around the lungs (pleural effusion). Pneumonia may cause fluid to build up in the thin space between layers of tissue that line the lungs and chest cavity (pleura). If the fluid becomes infected, you may need to have it drained through a chest tube or removed with surgery.

Pneumonia may cause fluid to build up in the thin space between layers of tissue that line the lungs and chest cavity (pleura). If the fluid becomes infected, you may need to have it drained through a chest tube or removed with surgery. Lung abscess. An abscess occurs if pus forms in a cavity in the lung. An abscess is usually treated with antibiotics. Sometimes, surgery or drainage with a long needle or tube placed into the abscess is needed to remove the pus.

Prevention

Get the flu vaccine each year ,People can develop bacterial pneumonia after a case of the flu,Get the pneumococcal vaccine,Practice good hygiene,Don't smoke.