Overview

Heart disease describes a range of conditions that affect your heart. Diseases under the heart disease umbrella include blood vessel diseases, such as coronary artery disease; heart rhythm problems (arrhythmias); and heart defects you're born with (congenital heart defects), among others.

The term "heart disease" is often used interchangeably with the term "cardiovascular disease." Cardiovascular disease generally refers to conditions that involve narrowed or blocked blood vessels that can lead to a heart attack, chest pain (angina) or stroke. Other heart conditions, such as those that affect your heart's muscle, valves or rhythm, also are considered forms of heart disease.

Many forms of heart disease can be prevented or treated with healthy lifestyle choices.

Symptoms

Chest pain, chest tightness, chest pressure and chest discomfort (angina),Shortness of breath,Pain, numbness, weakness or coldness in your legs or arms if the blood vessels in those parts of your body are narrowed ,Pain in the neck, jaw, throat, upper abdomen or back,Fluttering in your chest,Racing heartbeat (tachycardia).

Risk factors

Aging increases your risk of damaged and narrowed arteries and weakened or thickened heart muscle,Men are generally at greater risk of heart disease. However, women's risk increases after menopause.

Complications

Heart failure, One of the most common complications of heart disease, heart failure occurs when your heart can't pump enough blood to meet your body's needs,Heart failure can result from many forms of heart disease, including heart defects, cardiovascular disease, valvular heart disease, heart infections or cardiomyopathy it may also be a severe stage of alzheimer you can predict it by uploading a MRI scan image.

Sudden cardiac arrest is a medical emergency. If not treated immediately, it is fatal, resulting in sudden cardiac death.

Prevention

Certain types of heart disease, such as heart defects, can't be prevented. However, you can help prevent many other types of heart disease by making the same lifestyle changes that can improve your heart disease, such as: