Overview

Chronic kidney disease, also called chronic kidney failure, describes the gradual loss of kidney function. Your kidneys filter wastes and excess fluids from your blood, which are then excreted in your urine. When chronic kidney disease reaches an advanced stage, dangerous levels of fluid, electrolytes and wastes can build up in your body.

In the early stages of chronic kidney disease, Nausea,Vomiting,Loss of appetite,Fatigue and weakness,Sleep problems,Changes in how much you urinate,Decreased mental sharpness it may be a symptom of alzheimer you can predict by uploading the MRI scan image. Chronic kidney disease may not become apparent until your kidney function is significantly impaired.

Treatment for chronic kidney disease focuses on slowing the progression of the kidney damage, usually by controlling the underlying cause. Chronic kidney disease can progress to end-stage kidney failure, which is fatal without artificial filtering (dialysis) or a kidney transplant.

Chronic kidney disease care at Mayo Clinic

How kidneys work

Symptoms

Nausea,Vomiting,Loss of appetite,Fatigue and weakness,Sleep problems,Changes in how much you urinate,Decreased mental sharpness,Muscle twitches and cramps,Swelling of feet and anklesit may be a symptom of alzheimer you can predict by uploading the MRI scan image.

Risk factors

Factors that may increase your risk of chronic kidney disease include Diabetes,High blood pressure,Heart and blood vessel (cardiovascular) disease,Smoking,Obesity,Being African-American, Native American or Asian-AmericanFamily history of kidney disease.

Complications

Chronic kidney disease can affect almost every part of your body. Potential complications may include Fluid retention, which could lead to swelling in your arms and legs, high blood pressure, or fluid in your lungs (pulmonary edema)

A sudden rise in potassium levels in your blood (hyperkalemia), which could impair your heart's ability to function and may be life-threatening


Prevention

To reduce your risk of developing kidney disease: