Overview

Allergies occur when your immune system reacts to a foreign substance — such as pollen, bee venom or pet dander — or a food that doesn't cause a reaction in most people.

Your immune system produces substances known as antibodies. When you have allergies, your immune system makes antibodies that identify a particular allergen as harmful, even though it isn't. When you come into contact with the allergen, your immune system's reaction can inflame your skin, sinuses, airways or digestive system.

The severity of allergies varies from person to person and can range from minor irritation to anaphylaxis — a potentially life-threatening emergency. While most allergies can't be cured, treatments can help relieve your allergy symptoms.

Products & Services Book: Mayo Clinic Book of Home Remedies

Symptoms

Allergy symptoms, which depend on the substance involved, can affect your airways, sinuses and nasal passages, skin, and digestive system. Allergic reactions can range from mild to severe. In some severe cases, allergies can trigger a life-threatening reaction known as anaphylaxis.

Risk factors

Have a family history of asthma or allergies, such as hay fever, hives or eczema,such as hay fever, hives or eczema Are a child.

Complications

Foods, medications and insect stings are the most common triggers of anaphylaxis. Asthma. If you have an allergy, you're more likely to have asthma — an immune system reaction that affects the airways and breathing. In many cases, asthma is triggered by exposure to an allergen in the environment (allergy-induced asthma).

If you have an allergy, you're more likely to have asthma — an immune system reaction that affects the airways and breathing. In many cases, asthma is triggered by exposure to an allergen in the environment (allergy-induced asthma). Sinusitis and infections of the ears or lungs. Your risk of getting these conditions is higher if you have hay fever or asthma.

Prevention

Preventing allergic reactions depends on the type of allergy you have Even if you're treating your allergy symptoms, try to avoid triggers,If, for instance, you're allergic to pollen, stay inside with windows and doors closed when pollen is high. 